We found that the relative risk of breast cancer in men is comparable to that in women for alcohol intakes below 60 g per day. It continues to increase at high consumption levels not usually studied in women.
Copyright 2004 Kluwer Academic Publishers
Alcohol consumption is associated with a linear increase in breast cancer incidence in women over the range of consumption reported by most women. Among women who consume alcohol regularly, reducing alcohol consumption is a potential means to reduce breast cancer risk.
Regular alcohol consumption was not associated with breast cancer recurrence and total mortality overall, yet recurrence risk was only elevated in postmenopausal women.
Total alcohol intake of more than 27 drinks per week increases breast cancer risk in premenopausal women independently of the type of alcohol. Among postmenopausal women, an intake of spirits of more than six drinks per week increases breast cancer risk.
Overall alcohol consumption before diagnosis was not associated with disease-specific survival, but we found a suggestion favoring moderate consumption. There was no evidence for an association with postdiagnosis alcohol intake and breast cancer survival. This study, however, does provide support for a benefit of limited alcohol intake for cardiovascular and overall survival in women with breast cancer.
Alcohol use may be more strongly associated with risk of hormone-sensitive breast cancers than hormone-insensitive subtypes, suggesting distinct etiologic pathways for these two breast cancer subtypes.
Alcohol use may be more strongly associated with risk of hormone-sensitive breast cancers than hormone-insensitive subtypes, suggesting distinct etiologic pathways for these two breast cancer subtypes.
Consuming three to four alcoholic drinks or more per week after a breast cancer diagnosis may increase risk of breast cancer recurrence, particularly among postmenopausal and overweight/obese women, yet the cardioprotective effects of alcohol on non–breast cancer death were suggested.
Low levels of alcohol consumption were associated with a small increase in breast cancer risk, with the most consistent measure being cumulative alcohol intake throughout adult life. Alcohol intake both earlier and later in adult life was independently associated with risk.
In many studies, higher consumption of alcohol has been associated with an increased risk of breast cancer.1-3 However, the impact of low levels of drinking as is common in the United States has not been well quantified. A few studies showed increased risk 1, 4, but in most no significant association was observed.2, 3, 5-11 Many of these studies did not regularly update assessments of alcohol intake, which may change over a person's lifetime and obscure the ability to detect an effect. In addition, most lacked information on drinking patterns, such as regularity of drinking and heavy episodic (“binge”) drinking. Finally, because some breast cancer risk factors, for example first full-term pregnancy12 and ionizing radiation13, have different effects depending upon the ages at exposure, it is important to evaluate the role of alcohol intake at different times in a woman's life.
Taking account of shortcomings in the study base and methodological concerns, we confirm the alcohol-breast cancer association. We compared our results to those of an individual patient data analysis, with similar findings. We conclude that the association between alcohol and breast cancer may be causal.
Findings from this meta-analysis suggested that coffee/caffeine might be weakly associated with breast cancer risk for postmenopausal women, and the association for BRCA1 mutation carriers deserves further investigation.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Higher caffeinated coffee intake may be associated with lower risk of postmenopausal breast cancer. Decaffeinated coffee intake does not seem to be associated with breast cancer.
Higher caffeinated coffee intake may be associated with lower risk of postmenopausal breast cancer. Decaffeinated coffee intake does not seem to be associated with breast cancer.
Moderate to high coffee consumption was associated with significantly decreased risk for early events in tamoxifen-treated patients and modified hormone receptor status. If confirmed, new recommendations regarding coffee consumption during tamoxifen treatment may be warranted.
Results from this prospective study showed no relationship between coffee, tea or caffeine intake and breast cancer risk overall or by hormone receptor status.
In this large cohort of Swedish women, consumption of coffee, tea, and caffeine was not associated with breast cancer incidence.
Findings from this prospective study do not support a role of coffee consumption in the development of breast cancer but suggest that black tea consumption may be positively associated with risk of ER+/PR+ tumors.
Our findings suggest a possible influence of high coffee consumption or an increased coffee consumption on the risk of breast cancer.
Our findings suggest that coffee, black tea, and caffeine consumption before breast cancer diagnosis do not influence breast cancer-specific and overall survival.
Coffee and black tea contain a mixture of compounds that have the potential to influence breast cancer risk and survival. Coffee may influence risk and progression through the inhibition of DNA methylation (Lee and Zhu, 2006), influences on tumour differentiation (Pozner et al, 1986), or alterations in sex hormone levels (Ferrini and Barrett-Connor, 1996; Nagata et al, 1998). Black tea has also been shown to alter sex hormone levels (Kuruto-Niwa et al, 2000; Wu et al, 2005), and the flavonoids it contains may have antioxidant effects (Trevisanato and Kim, 2000). Caffeine is found in both coffee and black tea, and in rodents has been shown to increase mammary cell differentiation (VanderPloeg et al, 1992) and decrease tumour incidence (Petrek et al, 1985). Conversely, caffeine has also been associated with increased mammary tumours in animal models (Welsch et al, 1983).
Coffee consumption and breast cancer risk have been extensively studied with conflicting results (Ishitani et al, 2008; Bissonauth et al, 2009; Larsson et al, 2009a; Tang et al, 2009; Bhoo Pathy et al, 2010; Boggs et al, 2010; Nilsson et al, 2010; Fagherazzi et al, 2011; Gierach et al, 2011; Li et al, 2011). However, to our knowledge, only one observational study has examined coffee consumption and survival following breast cancer diagnosis (Sugiyama et al, 2010), and no studies have examined black tea or caffeine. In this study, we investigated whether pre-diagnosis coffee, black tea, and caffeine intake were associated with breast cancer survival among women diagnosed with invasive breast cancer in the population-based Swedish Mammography Cohort (SMC). We also examined whether the association between coffee, black tea, or caffeine and survival differed by hormone receptor status, disease stage at diagnosis, or smoking status.
Fatigued breast cancer survivors have an abnormal proinflammatory cytokine activity, an average of 5 years after diagnosis, as well as significant serum cortisol derangements compared to other survivors. One possible interpretation of our results suggests that there is an abnormal hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis functioning in breast cancer patients with persistent fatigue, who might be using coffee to self-medicate. In other words, coffee consumption in the present study might be a surrogate marker for fatigue. Because of the paucity of data regarding caffeine intake, poor sleep, fatigue, and breast cancer survival, further studies could be worthwhile.
Our findings suggest that increased coffee intake is not associated with a significantly reduced risk of breast cancer, but we observe an inverse association in ER-negative subgroup analysis. More large studies are needed to determine subgroups to obtain more valuable data on coffee drinking and breast cancer risk.
Fatigued breast cancer survivors have an abnormal proinflammatory cytokine activity, an average of 5 years after diagnosis, as well as significant serum cortisol derangements compared to other survivors. One possible interpretation of our results suggests that there is an abnormal hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis functioning in breast cancer patients with persistent fatigue, who might be using coffee to self-medicate. In other words, coffee consumption in the present study might be a surrogate marker for fatigue. Because of the paucity of data regarding caffeine intake, poor sleep, fatigue, and breast cancer survival, further studies could be worthwhile.
Our findings suggest that increased coffee intake is not associated with a significantly reduced risk of breast cancer, but we observe an inverse association in ER-negative subgroup analysis. More large studies are needed to determine subgroups to obtain more valuable data on coffee drinking and breast cancer risk.
The clinical and experimental findings demonstrate various anticancer properties of caffeine and caffeic acid against both ER(+) and ER(-) breast cancer that may sensitize tumor cells to tamoxifen and reduce breast cancer growth.
©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.
A high daily intake of coffee was found to be associated with a statistically significant decrease in ER-negative breast cancer among postmenopausal women.
Intake of high-fat dairy, but not low-fat dairy, was related to a higher risk of mortality after breast cancer diagnosis.
Many studies (1–14) have evaluated whether dairy intake is related to breast cancer; results are equivocal (15). A recent meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies found a modest inverse association of dairy intake and breast cancer risk, but study heterogeneity was high (16). Individual studies have shown positive (12), inverse (4,6,7,10,11), and null (1,2,9,14,17) associations. One study found that associations varied by levels of fat; greater consumption of high-fat dairy intake was positively related whereas consumption of low-fat dairy intake was inversely related to breast cancer risk (8). Researchers have hypothesized a variety of mechanisms through which dairy might influence breast cancer risk, including calcium, vitamin D, insulin-like growth factors (18,19), conjugated linoleic acid (20), and estrogenic hormones (21). Equivocal findings could be related to the counteracting effects of a multiplicity of factors that may act on breast cancer. However, because estrogens are considered the major etiologic pathway to breast cancer, the influence of dairy intake on estrogens should be strongly considered in understanding how dairy affects breast cancer–specific outcomes.
The Melbourne Collaborative Cohort Study, which included women from Australia, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, Italy, and Greece, found that dairy intake was statistically significantly related to higher levels of estradiol and free estradiol (21). Ganmaa and Sato hypothesized that estrogen and progesterone levels are markedly elevated in dairy products consumed in the Western world compared with those produced in traditional herding societies because most of the milk in the West is produced by pregnant cows, with production enabled both by genetic modification of dairy cows as well as modifications to their feed (22,23). However, because estrogenic hormones reside primarily in fat, levels of female hormones may be substantially lower in skim vs whole milk (24). Insight as to the influence of dairy on breast cancer outcomes may be gained by separately evaluating associations of high- vs low-fat dairy intake and hormonal cancers. Equivocal findings in previous studies could be related to differing patterns of high- and low-fat dairy consumption in different populations and the failure to distinguish high- vs low-fat consumption.
Consistent with this hypothesis, a recent study of dairy intake and prostate cancer survival found that greater consumption of whole milk was associated with worse survival but skim milk was associated with improved survival (25). No previous studies have evaluated associations of postdiagnosis high- vs low-fat dairy intake and breast cancer survival. We hypothesized that consumption of high-fat, but not low-fat, dairy foods would be related to a higher risk of recurrence and breast cancer mortality. We examined these associations in 1893 women with invasive breast cancer from the Life After Cancer Epidemiology (LACE) Study.
Dairy consumption is not strongly related to breast cancer risk in this prospective study. A non-significant negative association between calcium intake and breast cancer risk was seen, particularly among premenopausal women.
This analysis of African-American women provides little support for associations of dairy and meat intake with breast cancer risk.
Intake of high-fat dairy, but not low-fat dairy, was related to a higher risk of mortality after breast cancer diagnosis.
Many studies (1–14) have evaluated whether dairy intake is related to breast cancer; results are equivocal (15). A recent meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies found a modest inverse association of dairy intake and breast cancer risk, but study heterogeneity was high (16). Individual studies have shown positive (12), inverse (4,6,7,10,11), and null (1,2,9,14,17) associations. One study found that associations varied by levels of fat; greater consumption of high-fat dairy intake was positively related whereas consumption of low-fat dairy intake was inversely related to breast cancer risk (8). Researchers have hypothesized a variety of mechanisms through which dairy might influence breast cancer risk, including calcium, vitamin D, insulin-like growth factors (18,19), conjugated linoleic acid (20), and estrogenic hormones (21). Equivocal findings could be related to the counteracting effects of a multiplicity of factors that may act on breast cancer. However, because estrogens are considered the major etiologic pathway to breast cancer, the influence of dairy intake on estrogens should be strongly considered in understanding how dairy affects breast cancer–specific outcomes.
The Melbourne Collaborative Cohort Study, which included women from Australia, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, Italy, and Greece, found that dairy intake was statistically significantly related to higher levels of estradiol and free estradiol (21). Ganmaa and Sato hypothesized that estrogen and progesterone levels are markedly elevated in dairy products consumed in the Western world compared with those produced in traditional herding societies because most of the milk in the West is produced by pregnant cows, with production enabled both by genetic modification of dairy cows as well as modifications to their feed (22,23). However, because estrogenic hormones reside primarily in fat, levels of female hormones may be substantially lower in skim vs whole milk (24). Insight as to the influence of dairy on breast cancer outcomes may be gained by separately evaluating associations of high- vs low-fat dairy intake and hormonal cancers. Equivocal findings in previous studies could be related to differing patterns of high- and low-fat dairy consumption in different populations and the failure to distinguish high- vs low-fat consumption.
Consistent with this hypothesis, a recent study of dairy intake and prostate cancer survival found that greater consumption of whole milk was associated with worse survival but skim milk was associated with improved survival (25). No previous studies have evaluated associations of postdiagnosis high- vs low-fat dairy intake and breast cancer survival. We hypothesized that consumption of high-fat, but not low-fat, dairy foods would be related to a higher risk of recurrence and breast cancer mortality. We examined these associations in 1893 women with invasive breast cancer from the Life After Cancer Epidemiology (LACE) Study.
This analysis of African-American women provides little support for associations of dairy and meat intake with breast cancer risk.
There is no substantial epidemiological evidence to support a significant link between the intake of dairy products and breast cancer risk.
Dietary fat consumed during adolescence may be associated with an elevated risk of breast cancer. Further studies to assess this relationship among postmenopausal women, and confirm these results in premenopausal women, are needed.
Adherence to a Mediterranean dietary pattern did not decrease breast cancer risk in this cohort of relatively young women.
Higher intake of legumes was associated with a decreased risk of several cancers including those of the upper aerodigestive tract, stomach, colorectum, and kidney, but not lung, breast, prostate or bladder. Further investigations of these associations in prospective cohort studies are warranted.
Our results suggest that adherence to a diet pattern rich in vegetables, fish, legumes and olive oil may favorably influence the risk of breast cancer. This study is the first investigation of dietary effects on breast cancer risk in Cyprus, a country whose population has traditionally adhered to the Mediterranean diet.
Our results suggest that high intake of total vegetables, certain fruits, milk, and eggs may reduce the risk of breast cancer, while high consumption of animal-source foods may increase risk. The dietary associations did not appear to vary by ER/PR status.
This prospective study suggests that vegetable fiber intake may contribute to reduce breast cancer risk, in line with experimental mechanistic data.
A healthy dietary pattern may be negatively associated with breast cancer risk, while an unhealthy dietary pattern is likely to increase the risk among Iranian women.
Adherence to a Mediterranean dietary pattern did not decrease breast cancer risk in this cohort of relatively young women.
This prospective study suggests that vegetable fiber intake may contribute to reduce breast cancer risk, in line with experimental mechanistic data.
Pterostilbene shows an additive inhibitory effect on breast cancer cells when combined with tamoxifen, most likely from augmented cancer cell apoptosis.
This study demonstrated that 7 days of cyclical administration of milk fermented by both strains of L. helveticus diminishes tumour growth, stimulating an antitumour immune response. Compounds released during milk fermentation with L. helveticus R389 would be implicated in its immunoregulatory capacity on the immune response in mammary glands and tumour, which were correlated with the cytokines found at the systemic level. The milk fermented by L. helveticus R389 was able to modulate the relationship between immune and endocrine systems (by IL-6 diminution), which is very important in oestrogen-dependent tumour and induced cellular apoptosis.
Curcumin and piperine separately, and in combination, inhibit breast stem cell self renewal but do not cause toxicity to differentiated cells. These compounds could be potential cancer preventive agents. Mammosphere formation assays may be a quantifiable biomarker to assess cancer preventive agent efficacy and Wnt signaling assessment a mechanistic biomarker for use in human clinical trials.
Rosemary/carnosic acid, alone or combined with curcumin, may be useful to prevent and treat ER-negative breast cancer.
Cloves are natural products with excellent cytotoxicity toward MCF-7 cells; thus, they are promising sources for the development of anticancer agents.
Mitochondrial toxicity may be part of the mechanism by which the spices tested cause inhibition of proliferation and death in the cell lines tested. This study also warrants caution in the excessive use of these spices for human consumption.
Distinct morphological changes involving appearance of large vacuoles, membrane disintegration and increased expression of LC3 transcripts indicated that fenugreek extract induced autophagy and autophagy-associated death of Jurkat cells. In addition to the already known apoptotic activation, induction of autophagy may be an additional mechanism underlying the anticancer properties of fenugreek. This is the first report showing fenugreek as an inducer of autophagy in human cells and further work is needed to define the various intermediates of the autophagic pathway.
The studied plants are potential cytotoxic drugs that deserve more detailed exploration in the future, to develop novel anticancer drugs against sensitive and otherwise drug-resistant phenotypes.
Increasing dietary consumption of tomato-based foods may beneficially increase serum adiponectin concentrations among postmenopausal women at increased breast cancer risk, especially those who are not obese. Additional studies are essential to confirm these effects and to elucidate the specific mechanisms that may make phytonutrients found in tomatoes practical as breast cancer chemopreventive agents.
Breast cancer risk among postmenopausal women increases as body mass index (BMI) increases (1,–3). The relationship between obesity and breast cancer may be partially explained by the biological effects of the obesity-related adipokines, adiponectin and leptin, which are produced in and secreted from adipocytes including those in the breast (4). Studies have demonstrated an inverse association between circulating adiponectin and breast cancer risk overall (5,–8) and particularly among postmenopausal women (6, 8). Other studies have demonstrated a positive association between circulating leptin and breast cancer risk among postmenopausal women (5, 9, 10).
Currently postmenopausal women, who are all at risk of developing breast cancer, lack practical preventive methods to reduce their risk. One potential strategy could be through dietary modifications. Studies have investigated specific dietary patterns, yet few have examined the effects of tomato- and soy-enriched diets on anthropometrics and circulating adipokine concentrations and if these dietary changes could translate into significant modalities for breast cancer prevention (11, 12).
Lycopene, the predominant carotenoid in tomatoes, is a potent antioxidant relative to other carotenoids (13). Experimental and animal studies have shown that lycopene inhibits the growth of breast cancer cells and mammary tumorigenesis (14, 15). Additionally, lycopene has been shown to suppress biomarkers of cellular proliferation, including some proinflammatory cytokines, and alter adipocyte function (16), which may be associated with postmenopausal breast cancer risk. Some epidemiological studies have indicated that higher lycopene consumption is associated with reduced cancer risk (17, 18), but data for breast cancer have been mixed. A meta-analysis (19) of 15 studies examining the association between lycopene and breast cancer demonstrated no association [relative risk (RR) 0.99, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.93–1.06]. Although studies have found that lycopene positively modulates cytokine-driven pathways, lycopene may not be able to overcome the effects of certain stressors such as obesity (20).
Attention has also turned toward soy-based foods as chemopreventive agents. The typical Asian diet consists of fairly large amounts of soy, which is thought to be related to the lower breast cancer incidence among Asian women compared with their counterparts in the United States (21). It is hypothesized that the high content of isoflavones, particularly daidzein and genistein, contribute to the protective effects of soy. Isoflavones are polyphenolic phytonutrients capable of exerting both estrogenic and antiestrogenic effects (22), possibly contributing to increased and decreased risk of breast cancer, respectively. Results of epidemiological studies of the association between soy consumption and breast cancer have been mixed (23). A meta-analysis (23) of 14 studies examining the association between dietary isoflavone intake and breast cancer incidence demonstrated a modest reduction among high isoflavone consumers compared with those with the lowest consumption. Subgroup analysis revealed that risk reduction was significant in Asian, but not Western, women. This study also demonstrated that isoflavone intake was associated with lower breast cancer risk among postmenopausal but not premenopausal women (23). To our knowledge, no studies have examined the effect of isoflavone intake on adipokine concentrations among postmenopausal women who are at increased breast cancer risk.
Although the initial feasibility study was designed to determine whether women at increased breast cancer risk would be willing to adhere to the proposed dietary interventions, we also assessed the effects of these lycopene-rich and/or isoflavone-rich dietary modifications on circulating biomarkers of cell signaling in postmenopausal women at high risk of developing breast cancer (24). For the present study, we sought to examine the effects of these interventions on biomarkers of obesity, specifically serum adiponectin, leptin, and the adiponectin to leptin (A/L) ratio.
Increased soy protein intake may lead to small, but significant, increases in IGF-1 and IGFBP-3. Soy consumption also led to a significant decrease in SHBG, which has been hypothesized to promote, rather than prevent, cancer growth. Previous epidemiological studies, however, have confirmed soy’s protective effect on breast cancer. Additional investigation regarding the effect of soy on breast cancer risk and its mechanism of action appears warranted.
Increasing dietary consumption of tomato-based foods may beneficially increase serum adiponectin concentrations among postmenopausal women at increased breast cancer risk, especially those who are not obese. Additional studies are essential to confirm these effects and to elucidate the specific mechanisms that may make phytonutrients found in tomatoes practical as breast cancer chemopreventive agents.
Breast cancer risk among postmenopausal women increases as body mass index (BMI) increases (1,–3). The relationship between obesity and breast cancer may be partially explained by the biological effects of the obesity-related adipokines, adiponectin and leptin, which are produced in and secreted from adipocytes including those in the breast (4). Studies have demonstrated an inverse association between circulating adiponectin and breast cancer risk overall (5,–8) and particularly among postmenopausal women (6, 8). Other studies have demonstrated a positive association between circulating leptin and breast cancer risk among postmenopausal women (5, 9, 10).
Currently postmenopausal women, who are all at risk of developing breast cancer, lack practical preventive methods to reduce their risk. One potential strategy could be through dietary modifications. Studies have investigated specific dietary patterns, yet few have examined the effects of tomato- and soy-enriched diets on anthropometrics and circulating adipokine concentrations and if these dietary changes could translate into significant modalities for breast cancer prevention (11, 12).
Lycopene, the predominant carotenoid in tomatoes, is a potent antioxidant relative to other carotenoids (13). Experimental and animal studies have shown that lycopene inhibits the growth of breast cancer cells and mammary tumorigenesis (14, 15). Additionally, lycopene has been shown to suppress biomarkers of cellular proliferation, including some proinflammatory cytokines, and alter adipocyte function (16), which may be associated with postmenopausal breast cancer risk. Some epidemiological studies have indicated that higher lycopene consumption is associated with reduced cancer risk (17, 18), but data for breast cancer have been mixed. A meta-analysis (19) of 15 studies examining the association between lycopene and breast cancer demonstrated no association [relative risk (RR) 0.99, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.93–1.06]. Although studies have found that lycopene positively modulates cytokine-driven pathways, lycopene may not be able to overcome the effects of certain stressors such as obesity (20).
Attention has also turned toward soy-based foods as chemopreventive agents. The typical Asian diet consists of fairly large amounts of soy, which is thought to be related to the lower breast cancer incidence among Asian women compared with their counterparts in the United States (21). It is hypothesized that the high content of isoflavones, particularly daidzein and genistein, contribute to the protective effects of soy. Isoflavones are polyphenolic phytonutrients capable of exerting both estrogenic and antiestrogenic effects (22), possibly contributing to increased and decreased risk of breast cancer, respectively. Results of epidemiological studies of the association between soy consumption and breast cancer have been mixed (23). A meta-analysis (23) of 14 studies examining the association between dietary isoflavone intake and breast cancer incidence demonstrated a modest reduction among high isoflavone consumers compared with those with the lowest consumption. Subgroup analysis revealed that risk reduction was significant in Asian, but not Western, women. This study also demonstrated that isoflavone intake was associated with lower breast cancer risk among postmenopausal but not premenopausal women (23). To our knowledge, no studies have examined the effect of isoflavone intake on adipokine concentrations among postmenopausal women who are at increased breast cancer risk.
Although the initial feasibility study was designed to determine whether women at increased breast cancer risk would be willing to adhere to the proposed dietary interventions, we also assessed the effects of these lycopene-rich and/or isoflavone-rich dietary modifications on circulating biomarkers of cell signaling in postmenopausal women at high risk of developing breast cancer (24). For the present study, we sought to examine the effects of these interventions on biomarkers of obesity, specifically serum adiponectin, leptin, and the adiponectin to leptin (A/L) ratio.
Increased soy protein intake may lead to small, but significant, increases in IGF-1 and IGFBP-3. Soy consumption also led to a significant decrease in SHBG, which has been hypothesized to promote, rather than prevent, cancer growth. Previous epidemiological studies, however, have confirmed soy’s protective effect on breast cancer. Additional investigation regarding the effect of soy on breast cancer risk and its mechanism of action appears warranted.
We have developed a method enabling real-time visualization of TGF-β signalling in single live cells. Breast cancer cell motility and migration is driven by sub-populations of cells with dynamic TGF-β-Smad3 activity. Those sub-populations may be responsible for tumor invasion and metastasis.
There are more similarities than differences in the dietary intake of Hispanic and non-Hispanic white breast cancer survivors in the Women's Healthy Eating and Living study. Further analysis is needed to determine if higher lycopene consumption shown among the Hispanic participants will translate to greater protection against breast cancer recurrence or increased survival.
In the United States the risk of developing breast cancer differs significantly among women of different ethnicities or racial groups. The risk is highest for non-Hispanic white women, followed in decreasing frequency by African Americans, Asians, Pacific Islanders, Hispanics, American Indians, and Alaskan Natives (1,2). These differences may potentially be explained by culture and environmental factors, such as diet (3-13).
Dietary studies have suggested that diets high in fruits and vegetables and low in alcohol and total and saturated fats may reduce the risk of breast cancer (4-8,11) and breast cancer recurrence (14-16). Among women with a high incidence of familial breast cancer, an inverse association between carotenoid-rich foods and breast cancer has been reported (6), and alcohol consumption has been associated with an increased risk of breast cancer (16,17), particularly among women with folate insufficient diets. One study designed to evaluate variations in nutrient intake among breast cancer patients demonstrated statistically significant ethnic variation in dietary intake between African-American, Chinese, Hispanic, Japanese and non-Hispanic white breast cancer female patients (18).
To develop effective dietary intervention strategies for breast cancer survivors from different ethnicities or racial backgrounds, researchers must be familiar with the dietary patterns of the population they are targeting. Further, identifying significant differences in dietary patterns across ethnic groups may help to explain ethnic differences in breast cancer and breast cancer recurrence rates. To this end, before the study intervention, we evaluated the baseline reported dietary intake of the Hispanic breast cancer survivors and a subset of non-Hispanic white breast cancer survivors enrolled in a randomized controlled dietary intervention study.
Age (> 45 years), low family income (< $520/month), poor educational level (primary school level or lower) and past regular consumption of pork fat and fatty meat may be factors associated with an increased risk of breast cancer.
We observed no association between total fruit and vegetable intake and risk of overallbreast cancer. However, vegetable consumption was inversely associated with risk ofER− breast cancer in our large pooled analyses.
Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease. Expression of the estrogen receptor (ER) can beused to explain, in part, some of the differences in etiology, and clinical characteristics ofbreast cancer and survival rates among breast cancer patients (1–3). Breast tumors that express the ER (ER+tumors) are more strongly associated with hormone-related factors than tumors that do notexpress the ER (ER− tumors). Classic risk factors, such as late age at firstbirth and number of births, are more consistently associated with risk ofER+ breast cancer than with risk of ER− breast cancer(1). In addition, few risk factors have beenidentified for ER− breast cancer.
Fruit and vegetable intake has been hypothesized to reduce the risk ofbreast cancer, but the current evidence is inconclusive. A recent meta-analysis of 14 cohortstudies reported a statistically significant 11% reduced risk of breast cancer overallcomparing high vs low fruit and vegetable intake; results were not reported for breast cancersubtypes defined by receptor status (4). Threecohort studies (5–7) have recentlyinvestigated the association between fruit and vegetable intake and risk of breast cancer byreceptor status. All three studies found that women who consumed higher levels of fruits andvegetables had a 32% to 50% lower risk of ER− breast cancer compared withwomen who consumed low levels of fruits and vegetables. In another cohort study that evaluatedonly dietary patterns, women consuming a high fruit or salad pattern were observed to have a45% lower risk of ER− breast cancer (8). Because the number of studies examining ER− breast cancer islimited, more evidence is needed to examine the role of diet in ER− breastcancer.
One challenge in examining ER− breast cancer inepidemiologic studies is that ER− breast cancer accounts for only 15% to 20%of breast cancers (9). Thus, in most studies, thenumber of ER− breast cancer case patients is relatively low, which affectsthe power to detect modest associations with certainty.
Therefore, with the advantage of a large number of case patients, weevaluated the relation between fruit and vegetable consumption and risk of breast cancer by ERstatus in a pooled analysis of 20 prospective cohorts. These analyses expand our prioranalyses of fruit and vegetable consumption and breast cancer risk (10) by including 12 more prospective studies and increasing thefollow-up time for most of the studies in the original analyses. In addition, only two of the20 studies in this pooled analysis have previously examined associations specifically withfruit and vegetable consumption and risk of ER− breast cancer (5, 6). Insecondary analyses, we examined tumors classified by progesterone receptor (PR) status.
The results from this study show that dietary soluble fiber intake is associated with a significantly reduced risk of ER− breast cancer among pre-menopausal women. Additional studies with larger sample size are needed to confirm these results.
Self-reported size and shape were consistent with anthropometric measures commonly used to assess obesity and fat distribution, respectively. Self-reported body shape may be a useful proxy measure in addition to body size in large-scale surveys.
A proper design of foods enriched with bioactive compounds that can lead to significant effects on health represents a promising adjuvant treatment in patients with advanced breast cancer, due to its contribution in lowering the high oxidative stress present in these patients.
This study suggests that simple hysterectomy status does not alter breast cancer risk. Therefore, inclusion of women with simple hysterectomies does not substantially change estimated risk of breast cancer by ethnicity.
Consumption of EVOO in moderate quantities and throughout the lifetime appears to be a healthy choice and may favourably influence breast cancer risk.
Our results support the protective role of olive oil consumption on breast cancer among Canaries women.
Although major categories of macronutrients do not show significant associations with breast cancer risk in most studies, including the present one, vegetables and fruits are inversely, significantly, and strongly associated with this risk. There also is evidence that olive oil consumption may reduce the risk of breast cancer, whereas margarine intake appears to be associated with an elevated risk for the disease.
An olive oil-enriched diet brought about greater weight loss than a lower-fat diet in an 8-week comparison. Moreover, these women chose, overwhelmingly, the olive oil-enriched diet for 6 months of follow-up. An olive oil-enriched diet may be more efficacious for weight loss in breast cancer survivors than a standard lower-fat diet.
The issue is of major public health importance and deserves additional study.
Olive oil's bitter principle (i.e., oleuropein aglycone) is among the first examples of how selected nutrients from an EVOO-rich "Mediterranean diet" directly regulate HER2-driven breast cancer disease.
This novel intervention is acceptable to patients with demonstrated efficacy in improving dyspareunia and sexual function following breast cancer. Delivery of the OVERcome intervention appears feasible in a clinical setting, providing a potential treatment for this important clinical issue. The unexpected number of observed cases of stenosis further highlights the underreporting of sexual problems in this population, deserving further exploration.
© 2013 International Society for Sexual Medicine.
Olive oil's bitter principle (i.e., oleuropein aglycone) is among the first examples of how selected nutrients from an EVOO-rich "Mediterranean diet" directly regulate HER2-driven breast cancer disease.
This novel intervention is acceptable to patients with demonstrated efficacy in improving dyspareunia and sexual function following breast cancer. Delivery of the OVERcome intervention appears feasible in a clinical setting, providing a potential treatment for this important clinical issue. The unexpected number of observed cases of stenosis further highlights the underreporting of sexual problems in this population, deserving further exploration.
Among women with breast cancer, soy food consumption was significantly associated with decreased risk of death and recurrence.
This prospective study suggests that consumption of soy food has no protective effects against breast cancer. Further large-scale investigations eliciting genetic factors may clarify different roles of various soybean-ingredient foods on the risk of breast cancer.
We meta-analyzed more and newer research results, and separated women according to menopausal status to explore soy isoflavone-breast cancer association. We founded that soy isoflavone intake could lower the risk of breast cancer for both pre- and post-menopausal women in Asian countries. However, for women in Western countries, pre- or post-menopausal, there is no evidence to suggest an association between intake of soy isoflavone and breast cancer.
These findings contribute to our understanding of the level of soy intake among women at increased risk for breast cancer and highlight potential factors that may influence women's decisions regarding soy food consumption. Women, particularly in this vulnerable population, would benefit from clear messages regarding the health effects of soy.
All-cause mortality was reduced by 16% to 34% among women with breast cancer who reported a high intake of fish and long-chain ω-3 PUFAs. Long-chain ω-3 PUFA intake from fish and other dietary sources may provide a potential strategy to improve survival after breast cancer. Cancer 2015. © 2015 American Cancer Society.
© 2015 American Cancer Society.
The findings from this study support the results of several larger cohort studies and contribute to the evidence for the development of dietary recommendations for breast cancer risk reduction specific to postmenopausal women.
Although slightly less significant, the findings corroborate the relationships obtained by using FAO data. Our findings confirm the highly significant positive association between dietary fat and breast cancer mortality. The effect differs according to the type of fat consumed.
Our study provides additional support for the hypothesis that a dietary pattern rich in fruit and salad might protect against invasive breast cancer and that the effect might be stronger for ER- and PR-negative tumours.
Most of the studies on the risk of breast cancer in relation to individual foods and nutrients have had inconsistent results (Michels et al, 2007). Dietary pattern analysis is an increasingly common alternative approach for examining the relationship between diet and the risk of disease or biomarkers of disease (Newby and Tucker, 2004). Factor analysis applied to dietary data produces a few patterns of dietary intake that represent underlying independent dimensions of food and nutrient consumption. The assessment of dietary patterns in this way overcomes limitations of the single food or nutrient approach (Newby and Tucker, 2004). Two recent systematic literature reviews (Edefonti et al, 2009; Brennan et al, 2010) found consistent evidence that a ‘prudent'/‘healthy' dietary pattern was associated with a reduced risk of breast cancer.
Breast cancer, similar to most cancers, is heterogeneous in its pathology, natural history and response to treatment. Breast cancer differ, for example, with respect to oestrogen (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) status; hormone receptor-positive cancers exhibiting better differentiated morphological appearance and stronger clinical response to hormonal treatment (Althuis et al, 2004). There is evidence to suggest that risk factors (Colditz et al, 2004), including food items (Olsen et al, 2003; Stripp et al, 2003; Suzuki et al, 2005; Zhang et al, 2005; Cho et al, 2006) and dietary patterns (Fung et al, 2005; Velie et al, 2005; Agurs-Collins et al, 2009) differ in their association by tumour receptor status.
Using data from the Melbourne Collaborative Cohort Study (MCCS), we analyze the effect of dietary patterns on breast cancer risk overall, by attained age during follow-up and by tumour characteristics, including tumour grade and ER and PR status.
These results indicated that a diet characterized by a high consumption of vegetable/fruit/soy/milk/poultry/fish and a low consumption of refined grain/red meat/pickle is associated with a lower risk of breast cancer in Chinese women.
Adherence to healthy dietary patterns (including whole grains, fruits, and vegetables, olive oil, and fish) seems to be favorable in not having breast cancer, among middle-aged women.
Our results suggest that adherence to a diet pattern rich in vegetables, fish, legumes and olive oil may favorably influence the risk of breast cancer. This study is the first investigation of dietary effects on breast cancer risk in Cyprus, a country whose population has traditionally adhered to the Mediterranean diet.
These results suggest that high consumption of fatty fish is associated with a reduced risk for breast cancer, and that the intake of ω-3 fatty acids from fish is inversely associated with postmenopausal breast cancer risk.
Similar to other studies, dietary fish and milk fatty acids, and linoleic acid, are related to the corresponding EFA. Breast cancer risk was not significantly related to EFA in this study. However, the findings suggest positive relations between body mass index, body fat per cent and indexes of desaturase activity, and negative relations between central obesity and milk EFA.
Fish provides an excellent source of n-3 PUFAs that increases breast adipose EPA, DHA similar to supplements and represents a well-tolerated intervention for future studies of the impact of n-3 PUFAs and dietary patterns on breast cancer.
© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.
The inhibitory effects of dietary fish oil on human breast cancer cell growth and metastasis in this model system are ascribable to its high eicosapentaenoic acid and docosahexaenoic acid content; the mechanism very likely involves suppression of tumor eicosanoid biosynthesis.
This study is rather in favour of positive association between obesity, consumption of food rich in fatty matter and breast cancer, which is consistent with data from the literature using the same type of investigation. These results encourage increased cohort studies, case-control and experimentation in order to achieve a genuine code of cancer prevention, to define with precision the positive and negative.
These results indicate that a high-fat diet rich in omega-3 fatty acids can suppress human breast cancer cell growth and metastases in this mouse model system.
Breast cancer patients' need of control over their own life prompts an interest in alternative dietary habits after diagnosis, the focus being on a healthier diet. Expert dietary information is considered important. Many patients mentioned a lack of precise dietary recommendations for their individual disease situation and depended on information from outside their treatment centre.
A diet characterized by a low P/S ratio seems to be more important for the development of breast cancer than total fat intake.
